This project is done as a  part  of  Master’s  course in   Materials  Science  project curriculum under Nano materials department at  Universität Paderborn, Germany  in  2019.
Principle component analysis(PCA) is one of the multi statistical analysis technique applied for investigating STEM (scanning transmission electron microscope) spectrum images(SI). Application of PCA for STEM atomic column ‘Electron energy loss spectroscopy’ (EELS) and ‘Energy dispersive spectroscopy’(EDS) image data sets reduces the random noise efficiently and gives the fingerprint of material characterization in terms of bonding state, electronic structure, chemical state, identification of elements with good spatial atomic resolution. In this project we investigate PCA math for representing EELS and EDS image data sets from high noise to noise reduction image sets with spectrum indication of elemental characterization.
The obtained data cube consists of 100*100 pixels with a range of CCD 2048 bins which demands statistical methods to extract bulk information of specimen. Analysis of SI method offers post acquisition treatment of elemental maps including conventional spectral processing techniques such as background correction and signal deconvolution and hence by doing this method minor elements presence could be extracted for mapping but characterizing elemental fluctuations in nanometer and angstrom scale could not be that much easy because STEM suffers weak signal due to low amount of specimen volume and high voltage vs sample damage vs time of acquisition for each pixel with accordance to each energy channel. Weak signals in elemental mapping can be enhanced by using advanced statistical techniques which combine the numerical algorithms. The multi variance statistical method(MSA) is one of the best method to investigate EELS data cubes in an unsupervised way. These tools can greatly reduce the noise present in EELS data sets and can give the clear cut information about material spectrum or elemental information through SI method for a user. The reduced noise free data can be reconstructed by removing random noise data sets and the reconstructed data or SI can be used for fingerprint of materials. Dealing with such huge spectroscopy data sets can be done by using ‘Gatan Digital micrograph suite DMS’ software with integration of MSA plugin. Principal component analysis is one of the indispensable tool of MSA plugin methods developed to deal with SI.
